API Proposal (#5)
kubernetes-sigs/llm-instance-gateway: docs/proposals/002-api-proposal/proposal.md

 It is expected for the BackendPool to:
 - Enforce fair consumption of resources across competing use cases
 - Efficiently route requests across shared compute (as displayed by the PoC)
 
It is _not_ expected for the BackendPool to:
 - Enforce any common set of adapters or base models are available on the Pods
 - Manage Deployments of Pods within the Pool
 - Manage Pod lifecycle of pods within the pool 

Additionally, any Pod that seeks to join a BackendPool would need to support a protocol, defined by LLM Instance Gateway, to ensure the Pool has adequate information to intelligently route requests.

### LLMUseCase

An LLMUseCase allows the UseCaseOwner to define:
- Which LoRA adapter(s) to consume 
  - LLMUseCase allows for traffic splitting between adapters _in the same backendpool_ to allow for new LoRA adapter versions to be easily rolled out 
- SLO objectives for the UseCase
- The Pools this UseCase is relevant to 

### Spec

**LLMUseCase**
```golang
// LLMUseCaseSet represents a set of LLM use cases that are multiplexed onto one or more backend pools.
// This is generally owned by the "LLM Use Case Owner" persona, which can be teams in an organization.

> type LLMUseCaseSet struct {

Reviewer: We don't use Set for services generally.  A set is defined as pods, so this name is suspect.

Given that it is consistent with a series of "decisions" that map an input request to an output model backend, I'd suggest calling this an `LLMRoute` or `LLMService`.  "A route/service identifies an input model and maps to an output model name within a set of backend servers, adding constraints about how it is served relative to otehr use cases"

Reviewer 2: >A set is defined as pods

Is that formally defined anywhere, or is it more coincidental that we've only used "Set" in StatefulSet and DaemonSet names so far? 

>I'd suggest calling this an LLMRoute or LLMService

Although I'm definitely open to alternative names here, I don't like these options. In Gateway API we already have a fairly well-defined hierarchy that covers where Routes and Services fit. This would introduce a resource with one of those names that didn't fit at either of those layers.

In general, I think it's very difficult to come up with a resource name where the schema contains a top level list. In the case of Ingress and Routes, the list inside the object has a different name. So both Ingress and Routes contain a list of "Rules". It's possible that some of the confusion here is that the name for our resource also directly matches the name for the list. 

If Kubernetes could handle plural names reasonably well, I'd say we should just call this LLMUseCases and move on, but unfortunately I think we'd just run into other issues then.

We're trying to add two new resources here:

1. A group of Pods that are likely to share similar hardware characteristics and/or be capable of running the same models. This feels conceptually similar to an Instance Group in GCP.
2. A set of use cases that each can define separate objectives and models and attach them to one or more pools (the resource described in 1).

The simplest possible solution would likely be to merge 1 and 2, but that comes with significant scalability limitations. You can only fit so many use cases in a single resource, thus the 2-tier architecture we seem to be settling on.

Assuming that we're going to call 1 "LLMBackendPool", we should ideally find a name that pairs well with that. I'm decidedly not great at naming, but here are some rough ideas:

* LLMIntent
* LLMGroup
* ModelSet
* ModelGroup
* UseCaseGroup (coincidentally copies [Android](https://developer.android.com/reference/androidx/camera/core/UseCaseGroup))

I would not say that any of these are great names, but hopefully they can at least inspire some better alternatives.

Reviewer: > Is that formally defined anywhere, or is it more coincidental that we've only used "Set" in StatefulSet and DaemonSet names so far?

A lot of our naming conventions don't happen often enough to get captured into the api conventions, but as an API approver for Kube objects I'd probably take a pretty hard line on someone proposing to add a new `Set` to Kube unless it deployed pods or someone made a really profound argument.

>  In Gateway API we already have a fairly well-defined hierarchy that covers where Routes and Services fit. 

What is the most concrete summarization of "why this isn't a Route or a Service"?  There is some precedent in Kube ecosystem for calling groups of pods services (knative) but having a lot of extra "service types" is confusing.

> A group of Pods that are likely to share similar hardware characteristics and/or be capable of running the same models

In this case the act of subdividing the capacity of the model servers (we aren't dividing work into pods, we're dividing work into model servers) makes this closer to a "pool" or a "thing that work is scheduled into".  I think we should avoid a connection to pods in our naming.

> thus the 2-tier architecture we seem to be settling on.

In general in Kubernetes historically we have always modeled both sides of a relationship in order to provide effective default behavior out of the box.

> Re naming

I think we need to start a doc and try to capture some of the deeper back and forth with something to review.  I would like to start by summarizing the arguments above as to why it is not a service, a set, or a route.

Author: For posterity: This was discussed in the Instance Gateway Meeting:, notes [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1frfPE5L1sI3737rdQV04IcDGeOcGJj2ItjMg6z2SRH0/edit#bookmark=id.uppudq8jco7s).

To concisely summarize; 
- `route` didn't feel correct, as the description of the workload was less about routing, and more about scheduling.
- `set` was agreed to have the potential for confusion or friction
- It was also brought up that while we are focused on LLMs for now, we already know that other Generative workloads exist and use fine-tuning. So the generic name `ModelGroup` was chosen. 

This is still alpha so if there are strong opinions, we can readdress, but happy to run with this name for now.

        metav1.ObjectMeta
        metav1.TypeMeta

        Spec LLMUseCaseSetSpec
}

type LLMUseCaseSetSpec struct {
        // Defines the use cases in the set.

>         UseCases   []LLMUseCase

Reviewer: Define how multiple use cases from multiple top level objects compose (priority).

Author: Added a little more detail. Attempting to rely on the glossary supplemental doc to define what priority does to centralize definitions of terms. LMK if this lands for you or if we should have more details.

        // Reference to the backend pools that the use cases registers to.

>         PoolRef []corev1.ObjectReference

Reviewer: I think we should formally document why this is a `pool` vs a `backend`.  My argument would probably (based on how we're describing this) that a "routing decision maps input to a backend" OR "a model is served out of a pool of backends".  I slightly prefer the latter, because the sharing aspect is extremely strong.

However, we have said that we may wish to allow models to fail open to other backend types, and those wouldn't be pools.

So in the long run I think a backend is the appropriate way to describe this.  And the valid set of backends may be constrained by the achievable service objectives.

Reviewer 2: > we have said that we may wish to allow models to fail open to other backend types, and those wouldn't be pools

I'd missed that detail, is that captured anywhere? It seems like as soon as we start to move beyond a 1:1 relationship between a pool and a routing/ext_proc extension, it would be very difficult to achieve any objectives specified in these APIs (assuming that this would mean that load would be coming from other sources that our extension was unaware of).

 It is expected for the BackendPool to:
 - Enforce fair consumption of resources across competing use cases
 - Efficiently route requests across shared compute (as displayed by the PoC)
 
It is _not_ expected for the BackendPool to:
 - Enforce any common set of adapters or base models are available on the Pods
 - Manage Deployments of Pods within the Pool
 - Manage Pod lifecycle of pods within the pool 

Additionally, any Pod that seeks to join a BackendPool would need to support a protocol, defined by LLM Instance Gateway, to ensure the Pool has adequate information to intelligently route requests.

### LLMUseCase

An LLMUseCase allows the UseCaseOwner to define:
- Which LoRA adapter(s) to consume 
  - LLMUseCase allows for traffic splitting between adapters _in the same backendpool_ to allow for new LoRA adapter versions to be easily rolled out 
- SLO objectives for the UseCase
- The Pools this UseCase is relevant to 

### Spec

**LLMUseCase**
```golang

> // LLMUseCaseSet represents a set of LLM use cases that are multiplexed onto one or more backend pools.

Reviewer: We don't define clearly why we have multiple here.  The design doc for the API should explain why multiple can be present, what the behavior is when you have overlaps between multiple (I.e. like HTTPRoute), and when a user should or should not combine use cases together (i.e. describe the use case).

Author: Updated the documentation. Also updating to the `ModelGroup` naming that was discussed on Th, as I had those changes locally already and promised I would update

 It is expected for the BackendPool to:
 - Enforce fair consumption of resources across competing use cases
 - Efficiently route requests across shared compute (as displayed by the PoC)
 
It is _not_ expected for the BackendPool to:
 - Enforce any common set of adapters or base models are available on the Pods
 - Manage Deployments of Pods within the Pool
 - Manage Pod lifecycle of pods within the pool 

Additionally, any Pod that seeks to join a BackendPool would need to support a protocol, defined by LLM Instance Gateway, to ensure the Pool has adequate information to intelligently route requests.

### ModelGroup

A ModelGroup allows the UseCaseOwner to define:
- Which LoRA adapter(s) to consume 
  - ModelGroup allows for traffic splitting between adapters _in the same BackendPool_ to allow for new LoRA adapter versions to be easily rolled out 
- SLO objectives for the UseCase
- The Pools this UseCase is relevant to 

### Spec

**ModelGroup**
```golang
// ModelGroup represents a set of LLM use cases that are multiplexed onto one 
// or more backend pools. This is generally owned by the "LLM Use Case Owner"

> // persona, which can be teams in an organization. Plural ModelUseCases are

Reviewer: This doesn't explain *why* multiple are a convenience, or how I can use them.  Why would I want multiple together?  Why is it convenient?

Reviewer: I don't think you should have this sentence ("plural modeluse cases are allowed as a configuraiton conveniece") anymore.

Author: Updated

## Goals

- Drive concensus on direction of LLM Instance Gateway Solution
- Documentation of API decisions for posterity

## Non-Goals

- Hash out every implementation detail
- Be a formal KEP

## Proposal

### Personas

Before diving into the details of the API, decriptions of the personas will help shape the thought process of the API design.

#### Inference Platform Admin

The Inference Platform Admin creates and manages the infrastructure necessary to run LLM workloads. Including handling Ops for: 
  - Hardware
  - Model Server
  - Base Model
  - Resource Allocation for Workloads
  - Gateway configuration
  - etc

#### LLM Use Case Owner

Owns... An LLM based... Use Case...

Okay, seriously. An LLM Use Case Owner persona owns and manages 1 or many Generative AI Workloads (LLM focused *currently*). This includes:
- Defining SLO

> - Deploying LoRA Adapters (or other fine-tune)

Reviewer 3: I think we should be open for other use cases like prompt cache aware routing etc

Author: Absolutely, I tried to capture that in the 'other fine-tune`. But agreed that this could be worded better, open to feedback here.

The [PoC](https://youtu.be/NUBZg_uqqXk?si=v681EeYdGUGEVqQQ&t=1458) was focused on lower-level scheduling. And the API follows that similar logic, which lead to the proposal of the **BackendPool**.

### BackendPool

The BackendPool at its core is a logical grouping of compute, expressed in the form of Pods (typically model servers), akin to a K8s Service. The BackendPool would deploy its own routing, and offer administrative configuration to the Platform Admin. 

 It is expected for the BackendPool to:
 - Enforce fair consumption of resources across competing use cases
 - Efficiently route requests across shared compute (as displayed by the PoC)
 
It is _not_ expected for the BackendPool to:
 - Enforce any common set of adapters or base models are available on the Pods
 - Manage Deployments of Pods within the Pool
 - Manage Pod lifecycle of pods within the pool 

Additionally, any Pod that seeks to join a BackendPool would need to support a protocol, defined by LLM Instance Gateway, to ensure the Pool has adequate information to intelligently route requests.

### LLMUseCase

An LLMUseCase allows the UseCaseOwner to define:
- Which LoRA adapter(s) to consume 

>   - LLMUseCase allows for traffic splitting between adapters _in the same pool_ to allow for new LoRA adapter versions to be easily rolled out 

Reviewer 4: Do we expect the gateway to automate roll out? Or do we expect the user to implement such mechanism?

Author: For MVP, actual LoRA adapter rollout would be user controlled. We discussed features to help with LoRA lifecycle, open to feedback here. 

Using broad brush strokes here, I see two sides: 
- This is a gateway and so model lifecycle might be out of scope
or
- I'm primarily interfacing with my LoRA adapter via usecase, and would like usecase to help manage that for me a bit better

LMKWYT

Reviewer 4: As you mentioned, a gateway shouldn't manage any lifecycle (except the request lifecycle), so that's not the focus here. Additionally, Kubernetes is not suited to manage resources that fall between a Pod and a ConfigMap (e.g., ConfigMap doesn't support a blue-green rollout strategy).

It definitely highlights the need for defining an API to manage the lifecycle of models and adapters along this gateway.

> - SLO objectives for the UseCAse

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- SLO objectives for the UseCase
```

> - The Pools this UseCase is relevant to 

Reviewer 5: small nit - can we be specific here and say BackendPools? It may just be me but my brain immediately reconciles pool to "node pool" which is not correct in this context :/

Author: not a problem! Always happy to be more clear

### Spec

**BackendPool**
```golang
// A grouping of model serving instances that are expected to serve the same model(s) and speak the same API protocol
// The LLMBackendPool is also the scope for enforcing priority and fairness across different use cases.
// When used with the Gateway API, the LLMBackendPool can serve as the BackendRefs of an HTTPRoute.
// Generally the LLMBackendPool is owned by the "Inference Platform Admin" persona.
type LLMBackendPool struct {
        metav1.ObjectMeta
        metav1.TypeMeta
        Spec LLMBackendSpec
}

type LLMBackendPoolSpec struct {

>         // Pod selector, similar to k8s Service.

Reviewer 4: Don't you think we should refer to a service rather than pods? I believe that a group of backends is already exposed via a service, or can be.

Reviewer 2: The idea here is that there's already a ton of layers in this stack, so if there's an opportunity to remove one, I'd like to.

In traditional Gateway API deployments, the hierarchy might look like this:

```
Gateway -> HTTPRoute -> Service -> Deployment
```

With this proposal, we could be adding 2 new layers to that:

```
Gateway -> HTTPRoute -> LLMBackendPool -> Service -> Deployment
                               ^
                        LLMUseCaseSet
```

That would be pretty difficult for anyone to follow. We're essentially trying to merge the LLMBackendPool and Service concepts here. From a user-facing perspective, Service has a _ton_ of irrelevant fields for a backend pool, and a backend pool will need some configuration that doesn't fit in Service, so a new resource to describe backend pools seems like the least bad solution. With all of that said, I would not be surprised if the controller that implements backend pools also generates a corresponding Service as an implementation detail.

Reviewer 4: Thanks, @robscott, for your answer. I now understand the design decision here.

However, as @kfswain mentioned, there will be auto-configuration from service annotations at the start, and that's definitely something I'd like to see preserved in the future. It could simplify things for more straightforward use cases.

        Selector map[string]string `json:"selector,omitempty"`
        // Allows names within the `model` param that don't have an explicitly defined UseCase to pass through. Defaults to `false`.
        AllowUndefinedModels bool

>         // Admin-defined minimum objective value that can be requested, will cause an error in LLMUseCase if limit is broken.

Reviewer 6: What's the difference from `LLMUseCaseRule.objective`?

Author: Assuming we are talking about `MinTPOT` This was an attempt to show what administrative control might look like. This lets a platform admin declare policy, stating that no objective can ask for a TPOT below this configured value.

>         // Admin-defined minimum objective value that can be requested, will cause an error in LLMUseCase if limit is broken.

Reviewer 5: Are we thinking this will be validated when trying to map an LLMUseCase to BackendPool?

Author: `AllowUndefinedModels`? Yeah, if this val is `false`, this would enforce that only requests with a defined LLMUseCase would be allowed.

        MinTPOT float32
}
```

**LLMUseCase**
```golang
// LLMUseCase represents a use case of an LLM, which is multiplexed onto one or more LLMBackendPools.
// It allows mapping a use case to backend pools, and models or adapters that backend model servers understand.
// The LLMUseCase defines request routing behavior within an LLMBackendPool.
// Generally the LLMUseCase is owned by the "LLM Use Case Owner" persona, which can be teams in an organization.
type LLMUseCase struct {
        metav1.ObjectMeta
        metav1.TypeMeta

        Spec LLMUseCaseSpec
}

type LLMUseCaseSpec struct {
        // Map use case to one or more backend pools.
        // In the most common case, this should be a single backend pool.
        // Multiple backend pools can be used for traffic splitting while migrating to a new backend pool.

>         Rules   []LLMUseCaseRule

Reviewer 7: @smarterclayton as well

>         Rules   []LLMUseCaseRule

Author: I agree that rule is not exactly aligned with what this does. @Joffref suggests `LLMUseCaseSet`, which I like as well.

>         Rules   []LLMUseCaseRule

Reviewer 7: sounds good to me

}

// LLMUseCaseRule represents a mapping from a LLMUseCase to a backend pool and adapters/models in that pool.
type LLMUseCaseRule struct {
        // The name used in the `model` param of incoming requests

>         ModelName string

Reviewer 4: I feel like `ModelName` must be consistent within a UseCase. So, I'd rather see this field at the top level of the `LLMUseCaseSpec`. Or, as mentioned by @ahg-g, since `LLMUseCase` is a broader concept, it should be renamed to reflect that.

Reviewer 4: What about `LLMUseCaseSet`?

Author: I really like LLMUseCaseSet. @ahg-g?

Reviewer: See my comment, but I don't think Set is appropriate in the service context.  We should really strongly debate the structure of this and justify it though.

Reviewer: Discussion on this is moved to https://docs.google.com/document/d/1v1Rp6v_AfY5EfwpLqDadDpAaCg7OcnrUutzBUNxGoJE/edit

We will resolve there, then update the PR

        // Optional

>         Objective *Objective

Author: Added a link to: https://platform.openai.com/docs/api-reference/making-requests in the comment of `ModelName` lmk if this aligns with what you were thinkin

        // Required.
        // Reference to an LLMBackendPool. This allows registering a use case
        // as valid on a pool. 

>         // NOTE: Allowing multiple pools is a configuration convenience.

Reviewer 5: What's the expected behavior when multiple pools are specified?

Author: Yeah, so absolutely open to feedback here. The multiple pools is not a behavior design choice, but one of convenience. 

For instance if a user wants to specify the exact same usecase across multiple pools, they just add to this list, rather than having a set of different objects.

Reiterating that feedback here is appreciated, I do think it's potentially confusing, but valuable for power-usage

        PoolRef []corev1.ObjectReference
        // Optional.
	    // Allow multiple versions of a model for traffic splitting. 
	    // If not specified, the target model name is defaulted to the 
        // modelName parameter.
        TargetModels []common.TargetModel
}

// TargetModel represents a deployed model or a LoRA adapter.

> type TargetModel struct {

Reviewer 6: Do we need a separate field for model version?

Reviewer 4: I think we should. Indeed, the target model can have multiple versions running.

Author: Our thinking was that the user could/would pack the version naming into the `targetModelName`. Would we prefer semantic versioning?

Reviewer: I do not think we should impose a versioning on models, because we'll be having to deal with versioning defined outside of our domain (i.e. model names defined by others that users want to abstract).

        // The name of the adapter expected by the ModelServer.
        TargetModelName string
        // Weight is used to determine the percentage of traffic that should be 
        // sent to this target model when
        // multiple versions of the models are specified.
        Weight int
}

// Objective defines the performance targets of a LLM use case.
// NOTE: Objectives are best effort
type Objective struct {
        // Only one target can be set.
        TPOT    []LatencyTarget
        FairnessWeight int
}

type LatencyTarget struct {
        Percentile float64       `json:"percentile,omitempty"`
        Target       time.Duration `json:"target,omitempty"`
}
```

> ### Diagrams

Reviewer 7: I think it is useful to add a CUJs section to show how the API can be used to represent them.

Author: Ack, adding

- ExtProc looks up the UseCases affiliated with this pool `examplePool`
- `interestingName` is currently undergoing a change of LoRA adapters from `creativeNameGen-v3` (20% traffic split) to `veryCreativeNameGen` (80% traffic split)
- `veryCreativeNameGen` is selected as the LoRA adapter, and replaces `interestingName` in the body of the request (mutated by ext-proc) 
- the request is then efficiently scheduled onto one of the valid Pods
- metrics are sent back to the BEP, aggregated and re-emitted via sidecar (following the metric standardization)

How Multiple BackendPools might integrate together:

![K8s Gateway with BackendPools](./images/gw_w_bep.svg)

Here we see that we can have:
- Multiple Routes pointing to the same pool
- Routes splitting traffic across multiple pools

The functionality of the Kubernetes Gateway is unchanged with this proposal, allowing seamless integration with the BackendPool.

### Alternatives

#### Key Decisions

Our alternatives hinge on some key decisions:
- Allowing HTTPRoute to treat the BackendPool as the backendRef
- Creating a separate layer of abstraction, instead of extending HTTPRoute

> #### LLMUseCase as a backend ref

Author: Tried to add a bit more color in the bullets. But I do most of the explanation in the subsection. Are we wanting subsections to be colored in a tad more?

> We toyed with the idea of allowing an LLMUsecase be the target of an HTTPRouteRules backend ref. However, doing so would require the Kubernetes Gateway to be able to interpret body level parameters, and require that the HTTPRoute also specify the backend the UseCase is intended to run on. All of which would require substantial work on the Kubernetes Gateway, while not providing much flexibility.

Author: Reworded

> We toyed with the idea of allowing an LLMUsecase be the target of an HTTPRouteRules backend ref. However, doing so would require the Kubernetes Gateway to be able to interpret body level parameters, and require that the HTTPRoute also specify the backend the UseCase is intended to run on. All of which would require substantial work on the Kubernetes Gateway, while not providing much flexibility.

Author: Added some clarification PTAL

#### LLMRoute

Our original idea was to define all UseCase config at the Kubernetes Gateway layer, and have no BackendPool. This is inherently challenging, as LLMRoute would become a superset of HTTPRoute, or the Gateway would become bespoke, and work only for the LLMRoute use case.

## FAQ
- Why 2 layers of weighting? (HttpRoute & UseCase)
  - Feasibly done - No extension of HttpRoute. Just works, as BackendPool operates like a service.
  - Complexity is only expressed during transition states (model version upgrade)
  - Keeps Pools self contained - multiple K8s gateways can direct traffic to the same pool without needing to re-express Pool-level behavior
- What is a backend pool attempting to define?
  - BackendPool groups resources that should be shared over the UseCases that are affiliated with the pool

>   - Best practice would also suggest keeping the same base model for all ModelServers in the pool, but that is not enforced

Reviewer 4: Just wondering, why did you decide not to enforce that? Is there any technical blocker?

Author: No technical blocker, some of the arguments as to why we are proposing not to enforce: 

- Don't want to get into the business of enforcement/validation on Model Server level configuration. We can rely on a user to not foot shoot
- Don't want to restrict if a user wants to do something interesting. Such as slowly migrating their BackendPool to a new base model. So they could still serve from the same pool, should they want to

LMKWYT!

Reviewer 4: I agree with your first point; enforcing this is outside the gateway’s scope, and we should rely on the user. However, I don't understand your second point. As far as I know, a LoRA is tied to the model it was trained on. Maybe you were thinking about runtime, which I agree can be rolled out.

Author: Second point is a speculative case, but is an example where a user could do something novel. 

It would require that the second base model has an implementation for each adapter name that the previous base model did. I would think the easier path would be to make a second pool, but the point is, it's totally up to the user.

Reviewer 4: Interesting point you mention, I'd be happy to see how user will leverage this.

## Open Questions

> - Reasonable defaults

Reviewer 6: Should this be done through serving catalog? Or examples should provide good starting configs

Reviewer 4: I think it could be interesting to have presets available in the serving catalog. That would definitely help with adoption.

Author: I really like the idea of having examples within serving catalog also.

This bullet was meant more as a discussion point around how we ensure unsurprising behavior when a user creates a BackendPool/LLMUseCase when they do not declare optional fields. However I do see how the interpretation was taken this way. I tried to add a tad more clarification. LMK if that's helpful at all.

  - Should use cases be required? Or can a customer simply create a pool, and direct requests to the pool, and expect even fairness/priority across the different LoRA adapters that are requested?
    - If so? How should we handle the mix between explicit and implicit use cases? Are implicit usecases just default everything? (and inherently lower prio).
    - NOTE: Current thinking is this is yes we should allow non-use case defined requests, but is a security risk if on by default. So pools should opt-in
- Configuration control
  - How many routing decisions should we make on behalf of the user vs allow for configuration?

>      - Do we decide that SLO adherence is stricter than Fariness adherence? Do we allow for configuration of such tooling? (would be expressed in the BackendPool API)

Reviewer 8: typo: _"Fairness"_

Author: Done, thanks!

 It is expected for the BackendPool to:
 - Enforce fair consumption of resources across competing use cases
 - Efficiently route requests across shared compute (as displayed by the PoC)
 
It is _not_ expected for the BackendPool to:
 - Enforce any common set of adapters or base models are available on the Pods
 - Manage Deployments of Pods within the Pool
 - Manage Pod lifecycle of pods within the pool 

Additionally, any Pod that seeks to join a BackendPool would need to support a protocol, defined by LLM Instance Gateway, to ensure the Pool has adequate information to intelligently route requests.

### ModelGroup

A ModelGroup allows the UseCaseOwner to define:
- Which LoRA adapter(s) to consume 
  - ModelGroup allows for traffic splitting between adapters _in the same BackendPool_ to allow for new LoRA adapter versions to be easily rolled out 
- SLO objectives for the UseCase
- The Pools this UseCase is relevant to 

### Spec

**ModelGroup**
```golang
// ModelGroup represents a set of LLM use cases that are multiplexed onto one 

> // or more backend pools. This is generally owned by the "LLM Use Case Owner"

Reviewer: Statement is a little vague (used "owned" twice).  You might want to use more descriptive terms - maybe something like:

> A model use case owner is a team that trains, verifies, and leverages a large language model from a model frontend, drives the lifecycle and rollout of new versions of those models, and defines the specific performance and latency goals for the model over a shared pool of capacity owned by an inference platform team.

We don't have to use that whole thing, but I'd want to clearly define the who in terms of actions to be done.

Author: Kept a majority of the content, just tried to reword so it would fit into the paragraph nicely. LMKWYT

// persona, which can be teams in an organization. Plural ModelUseCases are

> // allowed as a configuration convenience to the user. Allowing a user who

Reviewer: This is too generic.  An example might be in order.

// has multiple usecases across multiple pools (with the same config) to
// specify the configuration exactly once, and deploy to many pools 
// simultaneously, allowing for a simple config and single source of truth
// for a given user. ModelUseCase names are unique for a given BackendPool,

> // if the name is reused, an error will be  shown on the status of a 

Reviewer: Explicitly describe how the "reuser" is identified (i.e. the algorithm used to select which model group "wins").

Author: Took a stab PTAL

        // The model name should be unique among the use cases that reference the same backend pool.
        // This is the parameter that will be used to match the request with. In the future, we may
        // allow to match on other request parameters. The other approach to support matching on 
        // on other request parameters is to use a different ModelName f HTTPFilter 
        ModelName string
        // Optional
        // Use cases with an objective have higher priority than use cases without.
        // IMPORTANT: By specifying an objective, this places the UseCase in a higher priority class than UseCases without a defined priority class. 
        // In the face of resource-scarcity. Higher priority requests will be preserved, and lower priority class requests will be rejected.
        Objective *Objective
        // Optional.
	// Allow multiple versions of a model for traffic splitting. 
	// If not specified, the target model name is defaulted to the modelName parameter.
        TargetModels []common.TargetModel
}

// TargetModel represents a deployed model or a LoRA adapter.
type TargetModel struct {

>         // The name of the adapter as expected by the ModelServer.

Reviewer: You probably need a few more sentences in this description.  Explain that model servers are expected to be configured for access to a set of LoRA adapters and that the naming of the adapter is defined by the inference platform admin who deployed the model servers.  Explain what happens if the adapter doesn't match a value (probably the model server returns a specific type of error, but explain what *should* happen according to our "model server protocol" for vLLM).

Author: Revised

- SLO objectives for the UseCase
- The Pools this UseCase is relevant to 

### Spec

**ModelGroup**
```golang
// ModelGroup represents a set of LLM use cases that are multiplexed onto one 
// or more backend pools. This is generally owned by the "LLM Use Case Owner"
// persona, which can be teams in an organization. We allow a user who
// has multiple UseCases across multiple pools (with the same config) to
// specify the configuration exactly once, and deploy to many pools 
// simultaneously. Enabling a simpler config and single source of truth
// for a given user. ModelUseCase names are unique for a given BackendPool,
// if the name is reused, an error will be  shown on the status of a 
// ModelGroup that attempted to reuse. The oldest ModelUseCase, based on
// creation timestamp, will be selected to remain valid. In the event of a race
// condition, one will be selected at random. 
type ModelGroup struct {
        metav1.ObjectMeta
        metav1.TypeMeta

        Spec ModelGroupSpec
}

type ModelGroupSpec struct {
        // Defines the use cases in the set.

>         // UseCases can be in 2 priority classes, CRITICAL and NONCRITICAL. 

Reviewer: Kubernetes uses `CamelCase` constants, not `CAPITALCONSTANTS`.

Author: Done!

> # LLM Instance Gateway

Reviewer 9: Please correct if I'm wrong here, can I say this is more like a LLM Instance Orchestrator? The current major use case is trying to provision LoRA instances to different Pods via some use cases?

Reviewer 4: The gateway is only responsible to route incoming requests to the right (regarding fairness, availability, load...) BackendPool running the LoRA adapter. Loading the LoRA adapter is the responsibility of the workload author. Then, it's out of the scope of the gateway.  You can [refer to the PoC](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/llm-instance-gateway/tree/main/examples/poc) for further details.

Author: @Joffref is correct. This is not about provisioning of adapters, but we do define them in the UseCase as they are the initial focus of how we intend to specify sharing of compute capacity.

+1 to refering to the PoC or the demo recording for more info. Also if we feel explanations are insufficient please lmk!

// and rollout of new versions of those models, and defines the specific
// performance and latency goals for the model. These model use cases are
// expected to operate within a BackendPool sharing compute capacity with other
// ModelUseCases, defined by the Inference Platform Admin. We allow a user who
// has multiple UseCases across multiple pools (with the same config) to
// specify the configuration exactly once, and deploy to many pools 
// simultaneously. Enabling a simpler config and single source of truth
// for a given user. ModelUseCase names are unique for a given BackendPool,
// if the name is reused, an error will be  shown on the status of a 
// ModelGroup that attempted to reuse. The oldest ModelUseCase, based on
// creation timestamp, will be selected to remain valid. In the event of a race
// condition, one will be selected at random. 
type ModelGroup struct {
        metav1.ObjectMeta
        metav1.TypeMeta

        Spec ModelGroupSpec
}

type ModelGroupSpec struct {
        // Defines the use cases in the set.
        // UseCases can be in 2 priority classes, Critical and Noncritical. 
        // Priority class is implicit, and by specifying an Objective,

>         // places the UseCase in the Critical priority class.

Author: LGTM! Thanks!

        TargetModelName string
        // Weight is used to determine the percentage of traffic that should be 
        // sent to this target model when multiple versions of the model are specified.
        Weight int
}

// Objective captures the latency SLO of a LLM use case.
// In MVP, meeting the SLO is on a best effort basis.
// Future: Extend the API for different behaviors of meeting the SLO.
// The gateway will perform best-effort load balancing, and work with other components (e.g., autoscaler) to meet the
// objectives. 
type Objective struct {
        // The AverageLatencyPerOutputToken is calculated as the e2e request latency divided by output token 
        // length. Note that this is different from what is known as TPOT (time per output token) which only 
        // takes decode time into account.
        // The P95 is calculated over a fixed time window defined at the operator level.
        DesiredAveragePerOutputTokenLatencyAtP95OverMultipleRequests
    *time.Duration
}
```

### Yaml Examples

#### BackendPool(s)
Here we create 2 BEPs that subscribe to services to collect the appropriate pods
```yaml
apiVersion: inference.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1

> kind: BackendPool

Reviewer 4: Do we plan to state on a CR definition of the BackendPool at the end of this proposal. Or do we plan to open another proposal? ---which seems odd to me.

I'd suggest the following definition based on this yaml:
```golang
// BackendPool represents a set of model servers having a common set useCases.
// BackendPool name is used to uniquely identify the backend pool in the ModelGroup.
type BackendPool struct {
	metav1.ObjectMeta
	metav1.TypeMeta

	Spec BackendPoolSpec
}

type BackendPoolSpec struct {
	// Services references all the available services within this BackendPool.
	Services []v1.ObjectReference `json:"services"`
}
```
Just rough idea.

Author: Yeah, I had the BEP definition in here at one point, but removed based on discussion. I meant to add it back, will do so today and update here.

Author: Added back

Reviewer 4: You rock!

metadata:
  name: llama-2-pool
  services: 
  - llama-2-vllm
---
apiVersion: inference.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: BackendPool
metadata:
  name: gemini-pool
  services: 
  - gemini-jetstream-tpu-v5e
  - gemini-vllm-a100
```

#### Model Group

Here we consume both pools with a single ModelGroup, while also specifying 2 useCases. Where `sql-code-assist` is both the name of the ModelUseCase, and the name of the LoRA adapter on the model server. And `npc-bot` has a layer of indirection for those names, as well as a specified objective.
```yaml
apiVersion: inference.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: ModelGroup
metadata:
  name: my-model-group
spec:

>   useCases:

Reviewer 9: this ModelGroup has two useCases and BEP, with this, what is the mapping for the useCases and BEP? Can one useCase use two BEP?

Reviewer 4: By definition, BackendPools referenced here has to hold the same useCases. It means that `sql-code-assist` is an available LoRA adapter on both BackendPool. Therefore, routing a request for `sql-code-assist` to any of the BackendPool works.

Author: That's correct. While routing to the BEP happens earlier(at the K8s Gateway). Allowing a user to specify all the UseCases they have, and all the BEPs they would like this model available on in a single place seemed a valuable UX, comments on the ModelGroup API definition further up goes into more detail. PTAL

Reviewer 9: Got it, thanks @Joffref and @kfswain , just want to confirm, this means for both `sql-code-assist` and `npc-bot` are available LoRA adapter on both BackendPool, right? 

If so, shall we update the description for this YAML a little bit like the following?

Here we consume both pools with a single ModelGroup, while also specifying 2 useCases. Where `sql-code-assist` is both the name of the ModelUseCase, and the name of the LoRA adapter on the model server. And `npc-bot` has a layer of indirection for those names, as well as a specified objective. Both `sql-code-assist` and `npc-bot` are available LoRA adapter on both BackendPool and routing to the BackendPool happens earlier(at the K8s Gateway).

Author: >  just want to confirm, this means for both sql-code-assist and npc-bot are available LoRA adapter on both BackendPool, right? 

Yes and no, `sql-code-assist` is the name of the LoRA adapter (we know this because there is no additional configuration in the `targetModels` object, so the assumed default is the `modelName`

However for `npc-bot`, since the `targetModels` have 2 entries `npc-bot-v1` & `npc-bot-v2`, those 2 entries are the names of the lora adapter on the model server, and when a request comes in for `npc-bot` we split traffic between those 2. (Useful for a controlled rollout of a new adapter, or something like that).

Maybe that part was already understood, so forgive me if we are reviewing the same content again. But tried to reword this in the yaml description. Lemme know if this is more helpful. Thanks!

Reviewer 9: this is super clear, thanks!

  - modelName: sql-code-assist
  - modelName: npc-bot
    objective: 
      desiredAveragePerOutputTokenLatencyAtP95OverMultipleRequests: 50ms
    targetModels:
      targetModelName: npc-bot-v1
        weight: 50
      targetModelName: npc-bot-v2
        weight: 50 	
  poolRef: 
   - name: llama-2-pool
   - name: gemini-pool
```

### Diagrams

Much of this is better explained visually:

Below is a detailed view of the BackendPool

![BackendPool](./images/bep.svg)

This diagram lightly follows the example request for a model `interestingName`. 
The flow can be described as:
- The request comes in to our routing solution(Ext-Proc)
- ExtProc looks up the UseCases affiliated with this pool `examplePool`
- `interestingName` is currently undergoing a change of LoRA adapters from `creativeNameGen-v3` (20% traffic split) to `veryCreativeNameGen` (80% traffic split)
- `veryCreativeNameGen` is selected as the LoRA adapter, and replaces `interestingName` in the body of the request (mutated by ext-proc) 
- the request is then efficiently scheduled onto one of the valid Pods

> - metrics are sent back to the BEP, aggregated and re-emitted via sidecar (following the metric standardization)

Reviewer 9: How about highlight the format of metrics here? Like in Prometheus format or OTEL etc? I think this can help the end user to integrate with some observability platforms

Author: Done! 

Agreed that our metrics story could use some improvement. We intend to create a protocol of metrics that the I-GW expects to ingest. While not the scope of this section here, would also be equally valuable that we specify any metrics we intend to emit. I don't expect this portion to be solidified for the alpha phase however.

  - Model Server
  - Base Model
  - Resource Allocation for Workloads
  - Gateway configuration
  - etc

#### LLM Use Case Owner

An LLM Use Case Owner persona owns and manages 1 or many Generative AI Workloads (LLM focused *currently*). This includes:
- Defining SLO
- Managing fine-tunes
  - LoRA Adapters
  - System Prompts
  - Prompt Cache
  - etc.
- Managing rollout of adapters

### Axioms 

The API design is based on these axioms:

- Pools of shared compute should be *discrete* for scheduling to properly work
- Pod-level scheduling should not be handled by a high-level gateway 
- Simple use cases should be simple to define (or are implicitly defined via reasonable defaults)
- This solution should be composable with other Gateway solutions and flexible to fit customer needs
- The MVP will heavily assume requests are done using the OpenAI spec, but open to extension in the future
- The Gateway should route in a way that does not generate a queue of requests at the model server level

The [PoC](https://youtu.be/NUBZg_uqqXk?si=v681EeYdGUGEVqQQ&t=1458) was focused on lower-level scheduling. And the API follows that similar logic, which lead to the proposal of the **BackendPool**.

> ### BackendPool

Reviewer 2: Recommend: LLMServerPool as starting name for this

Author: Done

The BackendPool at its core is a logical grouping of compute, expressed in the form of Pods (typically model servers), akin to a K8s Service. The BackendPool would deploy its own routing, and offer administrative configuration to the Platform Admin. 

 It is expected for the BackendPool to:
 - Enforce fair consumption of resources across competing use cases
 - Efficiently route requests across shared compute (as displayed by the PoC)
 
It is _not_ expected for the BackendPool to:
 - Enforce any common set of adapters or base models are available on the Pods
 - Manage Deployments of Pods within the Pool
 - Manage Pod lifecycle of pods within the pool 

Additionally, any Pod that seeks to join a BackendPool would need to support a protocol, defined by LLM Instance Gateway, to ensure the Pool has adequate information to intelligently route requests.

> ### ModelGroup

Reviewer 2: Recommend starting with LLMService for name here

Author: Done!

> A LLMService allows the LLMServiceOwner to define:

Reviewer 7: nit: did we define LLMServiceOwner somewhere? probably LLM Service Owner?

Reviewer 7: yes, we are calling it "LLM Service Owner" not LLMServiceOwner, no spaces makes it look like an object/struct

- Which LoRA adapter(s) to consume 
  - LLMService allows for traffic splitting between adapters _in the same LLMServerPool_ to allow for new LoRA adapter versions to be easily rolled out 
- SLO objectives for the LLMService
- The Pools this LLMService is relevant to 

### Spec

**LLMService**
```golang
// LLMService represents a set of LLM use cases that are multiplexed onto one 
// or more backend pools. This resource is managed by the "LLM Service Owner"

> // persona. The model use case owner a team that trains, verifies, and

Author: Reworded

// performance and latency goals for the model. These model use cases are
// expected to operate within a BackendPool sharing compute capacity with other
// ModelUseCases, defined by the Inference Platform Admin. We allow a user who
// has multiple UseCases across multiple pools (with the same config) to
// specify the configuration exactly once, and deploy to many pools 
// simultaneously. Enabling a simpler config and single source of truth
// for a given user. ModelUseCase names are unique for a given BackendPool,
// if the name is reused, an error will be  shown on the status of a 
// ModelGroup that attempted to reuse. The oldest ModelUseCase, based on
// creation timestamp, will be selected to remain valid. In the event of a race
// condition, one will be selected at random. 
type ModelGroup struct {
        metav1.ObjectMeta
        metav1.TypeMeta

        Spec ModelGroupSpec
}

type ModelGroupSpec struct {
        // Defines the use cases in the set.
        // UseCases can be in 2 priority classes, Critical and Noncritical. 
        // Priority class is implicitly set to Critical by specifying an Objective.
        // Otherwise the UseCase is considered Noncritical.

>         UseCases   []ModelUseCases

Reviewer: I think we should rename this to `models`.  Each of these is about a public model (so the field should be `name`, not `modelName`).  The doc should be updated to discuss in terms of models.

        // Reference to the backend pools that the use cases registers to.
        PoolRef []corev1.ObjectReference
}

// LLMService defines the policies for routing the traffic of a use case, this includes performance objectives 
// and traffic splitting between different versions of the model.

> type ModelLLMServices struct {

Author: It is, replace all bit me. Renamed to ModelConfig, I expect renaming here post-alpha

        // The name of the model as the users set in the "model" parameter in the requests.
        // The model name should be unique among the use cases that reference the same backend pool.
        // This is the parameter that will be used to match the request with. In the future, we may
        // allow to match on other request parameters. The other approach to support matching on 
        // on other request parameters is to use a different ModelName f HTTPFilter 
        ModelName string
        // Optional
        // Use cases with an objective have higher priority than use cases without.
        // IMPORTANT: By specifying an objective, this places the UseCase in a higher priority class than UseCases without a defined priority class. 
        // In the face of resource-scarcity. Higher priority requests will be preserved, and lower priority class requests will be rejected.
        Objective *Objective
        // Optional.
	// Allow multiple versions of a model for traffic splitting. 

> 	// If not specified, the target model name is defaulted to the modelName parameter.

Reviewer: What if i want to prereserve the model name without supporting it?  Should I be able to define a model name that deliberately returns 404 or another specific error so that I can test that the gateway uses it?  Should I be able to disable a model name explicitly (perhaps by setting a weight to zero)?

Author: Yeah, we could support name reservation by detecting if all targetModel weights are zero. We could have ext proc short circuit the request and return a descriptive err. 'No valid target models' or something like that

Author: Added some comments on `ModelName`, also explicitly stated that ModelName is distinct per LSP, I don't think we specified that anywhere, but it was just kind of assumed.

>         TargetModels []common.TargetModel

Reviewer: Have a godoc comment describing that the model name is often a lora model.

Author: Done

        // The P95 is calculated over a fixed time window defined at the operator level.
        DesiredAveragePerOutputTokenLatencyAtP95OverMultipleRequests
    *time.Duration
}
```

**BackendPool**
```golang
// The BackendPool is a construct for pooling compute (often model servers) to
// serve large models, that have the ability to share capacity across multiple
// use cases (such as through prompt engineering, LoRA adapters, etc).
// BackendPools have a dependency on a Gateway that is compatible with ext-proc
// (External Processing). When a new BP object is created, a new ext proc
// deployment is created. BackendPools require at minimum a single UseCase to
// be subscribed to them to accept traffic, any traffic with a model not
// definied within a UseCase will be rejected.
type BackendPool struct {
        metav1.ObjectMeta
        metav1.TypeMeta

        Spec BackendPoolSpec
}

type BackendPoolSpec struct {
        // Select the distinct services to include in the backend pool. These
        // services should be consumed by only the backendpool they are part
        // of. Should this behavior be breached, routing behavior is not
        // guaranteed.

>         ServiceRef []corev1.ObjectReference

Reviewer 4: How do you specify target port in such reference? Using `fieldPath`?

  - gemini-jetstream-tpu-v5e
  - gemini-vllm-a100
```

#### LLMService

Here we consume both pools with a single LLMService, while also specifying 2 LLMServices. Where `sql-code-assist` is both the name of the ModelLLMService, and the name of the LoRA adapter on the model server. And `npc-bot` has a layer of indirection for those names, as well as a specified objective. Both `sql-code-assist` and `npc-bot` have available LoRA adapters on both LLMServerPools and routing to each LLMServerPool happens earlier(at the K8s Gateway). So traffic splitting between separate pools happens at the K8s Gateway.
```yaml
apiVersion: inference.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: LLMService
metadata:
  name: my-llm-service
spec:
  LLMServices:
  - modelName: sql-code-assist
  - modelName: npc-bot
    objective: 
      desiredAveragePerOutputTokenLatencyAtP95OverMultipleRequests: 50ms
    targetModels:
      targetModelName: npc-bot-v1
        weight: 50
      targetModelName: npc-bot-v2
        weight: 50 	
  poolRef: 
   - name: llama-2-pool
   - name: gemini-pool
```

### Diagrams

Much of this is better explained visually:

Below is a detailed view of the LLMServerPool

![LLMServerPool](./images/lsp.svg)

> This diagram lightly follows the example request for a model `interestingName`. 

Reviewer 7: update the model name to match the one used in the diagram

The flow can be described as:
- The request comes in to our routing solution(Ext-Proc)
- ExtProc looks up the LLMServices affiliated with this pool `examplePool`

> - `interestingName` is currently undergoing a change of LoRA adapters from `creativeNameGen-v3` (20% traffic split) to `veryCreativeNameGen` (80% traffic split)

Reviewer 7: ditto, update the model and target model names.

        // IMPORTANT: By specifying an objective, this places the LLMService in a higher priority class than LLMServices without a defined priority class. 
        // In the face of resource-scarcity. Higher priority requests will be preserved, and lower priority class requests will be rejected.
        Objective *Objective
        // Optional.
	      // Allow multiple versions of a model for traffic splitting. 
	      // If not specified, the target model name is defaulted to the modelName parameter.
        // modelName is often in reference to a LoRA adapter.
        TargetModels []TargetModel
}

// TargetModel represents a deployed model or a LoRA adapter. The
// TargetModelName is expected to match the name of the LoRA adapter
// (or base model) as it is registered within the model server. Inference
// Gateway assumes that the model exists on the model server and is the
// responsibility of the user to validate a correct match. Should a model fail
// to exist at request time, the error is processed by the Instance Gateway,
// and then emitted on the appropriate LLMService object.
type TargetModel struct {
        // The name of the adapter as expected by the ModelServer.

>         TargetModelName string

Reviewer 7: do we want to call this just `Name`?

Author: SGTM, done.

# LLM Instance Gateway

## Proposal Status
 ***Draft***

## Table of Contents

<!-- toc -->

-   [Summary](#summary)
-   [Goals](#goals)
-   [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
-   [Proposal](#proposal)
    -   [Personas](#personas)
        -   [Inference Platform Admin](#inference-platform-admin)

>         -   [LLM Service Owner](#llm-use-case-owner)

Reviewer 7: update the link

        Models []Model
        // Reference to the backend pools that the services registers to.
        PoolRef []corev1.ObjectReference
}

// Model defines the policies for routing the traffic of a use case, this includes performance objectives 
// and traffic splitting between different versions of the model.
type Model struct {
        // The name of the model as the users set in the "model" parameter in the requests.
        // The model name should be unique among the services that reference the same backend pool.
        // This is the parameter that will be used to match the request with. In the future, we may
        // allow to match on other request parameters. The other approach to support matching on 
        // on other request parameters is to use a different ModelName per HTTPFilter.
        // Due to these properties. ModelNames must be unique across an LSP.
        // ModelNames can be reserved without implementing an actual model in the pool.
        // This can be done by specifying a target model and setting the weight to zero,
        // an error will be returned specifying that no valid target model is found.
        ModelName string
        // Optional

>         // Use cases with an objective have higher priority than services without.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
        // LLM services with an objective have higher priority than services without.
```

        Objective *Objective
        // Optional.
	      // Allow multiple versions of a model for traffic splitting. 
	      // If not specified, the target model name is defaulted to the modelName parameter.
        // modelName is often in reference to a LoRA adapter.
        TargetModels []TargetModel
}

// TargetModel represents a deployed model or a LoRA adapter. The
// TargetModelName is expected to match the name of the LoRA adapter
// (or base model) as it is registered within the model server. Inference
// Gateway assumes that the model exists on the model server and is the
// responsibility of the user to validate a correct match. Should a model fail
// to exist at request time, the error is processed by the Instance Gateway,
// and then emitted on the appropriate LLMService object.
type TargetModel struct {
        // The name of the adapter as expected by the ModelServer.
        TargetModelName string
        // Weight is used to determine the percentage of traffic that should be 
        // sent to this target model when multiple versions of the model are specified.
        Weight int
}

> // Objective captures the latency SLO of a LLM use case.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
// Objective captures the latency SLO of a model.
```
